README.md, before:

# bcloud-research

## Installation
Check out my [postgres installation overview](https://github.com/phase7/bcloud-research/blob/phase7-install-postgres/install-postgres-manjaro.md) to see how I installed on Manjaro.

Below we will look at some of the most useful commands of postgres command line tool.

## Postgres Shell
We can get into the shell by executing psql command. We will likely see our default user name. in this shell we can run the following commands to inspect database and execute  tasks. (will update as I go on)

| Commands  | What they do                                                |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| \q        | quit psql                                                   |
| \i FILE   | execute commands from file                                  |
| \d        | list tables, views, and sequences                           |
| \d TABLENAME| Show table schema and other details of `TABLENAME` table                                  |
| \l        | list databases                                              |
| \c DBNAME | connect to new database DBNAME (currently default username) |
| \x        | Expand view; To see long table records in a beautiful manner|

## Basic SQL (common operations and keywords)

Following are some basic sql commands for beginners. (will update as I go on)

| Operation                                    | Query                                                                                                                                                                                                                | What you should know about them                                                                                             |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CREATE DATABASE                              | CREATE DATABASE dbname;                                                                                                                                                                                              | create a database named DBNAME                                                                                              |
| DELETE DATABASE                              | CREATE DATABASE dbname;                                                                                                                                                                                              | Delete a database named DBNAME                                                                                              |
| Create a table                               | CREATE TABLE person (   id BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,   first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,   last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,   gender VARCHAR(8) NOT NULL,   email VARCHAR(150),   date_of_birth DATE NOT NULL ); | Create a new table schema with constarints                                                                                  |
| Delete a table                               | DROP TABLE tablename                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Delete a table. In db this is colloquilly called dropping a table.                                                          |
| Insert new value in table                    | INSERT INTO tablename (   col_name ) VALUES ('value');                                                                                                                                                               | insert `value` in the `col_name` column of `tablename` table                                                                |
| Insert multiple values                       | INSERT INTO person (   first_name,   last_name,   gender,   date_of_birth ) VALUES ('hey', 'bro', 'male', DATE '1234-5-6');                                                                                          | insert multiple values at multiple columns at once.                                                                         |
| Show all rows of a table                     | SELECT * FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                                             | all data from a table - `tablename`                                                                                         |
| Show specific rows                           | SELECT col1, col2 FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                                    | chosen column data from a table - `tablename`                                                                               |
| Sort data and show them                      | SELECT * FROM tablename ORDER BY col_name [ASC/DESC]                                                                                                                                                                 | show data in a sorted manner, either ASCending, or DESCending order                                                         |
| Get distinct data                            | SELECT DISTINCT col_name FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                             | Show unique data, rejecting the duplicate ones                                                                              |
| Filter data based on condition               | SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col='value';                                                                                                                                                                           | Show filtered data when conditions such as specific value for a column is matched!                                          |
| Filter data based on more than one condition | SELECT  *  FROM  tablename  WHERE  col1< 'value1'   AND  (col2>= 'value2'   OR  col3<> 'value3' );                                                                                                                   | Multiple conditions can be made with `AND` and `OR` operators. (`<>` is the `!=` for SQL)                                   |
| Skip rows and get specific number of rows    | SELECT * FROM tablename OFFSET 5 LIMIT 5;                                                                                                                                                                            | To get row from 6 to 10. (While `OFFSET` is ANSI Standard, `LIMIT` is limited (_pun intended_) to `postgresql` and `mysql`) |
| Same as above, but universal                 | SELECT * FROM tablename OFFSET 5 FETCH FIRST 5 ROW ONLY;                                                                                                                                                             | To get row from 6 to 10 following ANSI all the way. `FETCH` is present in all DB Engines.                                   |
| Set data range                       | SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col_name BETWEEN 'value1' AND 'value2';                        | get data output between given ranges                                                                     |
| Check condition for particular cases | SELECT   *   FROM  tablename  WHERE  col_name  IN  ( ' value1 ' , ' value2 ' ,  ' value3 '); | check for selected conditions. this method can be helpful to get multiple  or conditions checked easily. |

## Intermediate SQL (Operators and operations)

| Operation                              | Query                                                                                                                                                                           | What you should know about them                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Condition matching using patterns      |  - SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col_name LIKE 'pattern'; - SELECT * FROM person WHERE email LIKE '%gmail%';                                                                    | select only conditions that matches pattern. For example, the second query will select all emails that have gmail in them. For details in pattern matching [click here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.3/functions-matching.html) |
| Delete a specific row                  | DELETE FROM tablename WHERE col_name='value';                                                                                                                                   | delete the condition matching row                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Update a value on a specific condition | UPDATE tablename SET col_name='new_value' WHERE id='something';                                                                                                                 | you can use all conditions allowed for SELECT operation to update a value                                                                                                                                                            |
| Add primary key                        | ALTER TABLE tablename ADD PRIMARY KEY (col_name);                                                                                                                               | Add a column as the primary key.[Details here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-constraints.html#DDL-CONSTRAINTS-PRIMARY-KEYS)                                                                                            |
| Create a constraint                    | ALTER   TABLE  person ADD  CONSTRAINT unique_email UNIQUE(email)                                                                                                                | Add a constraint for a column, here the value must be `UNIQUE`                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Create a condition constraint          | ALTER TABLE person ADD CONSTRAINT gender_constraint CHECK(gender = 'Male' OR gender = 'Female');                                                                                | Add a constraint for selective conditions to be met.                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Remove a constraint                    | ALTER TABLE person DROP CONSTRAINT constraint_name                                                                                                                              | Remove a constraint that is already set on column.[Check for details on constraints here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/ddl-constraints.html)                                                                                  |
| Ignore exceptions                      | INSERT into tablename (col_name) VALUES ('values') ON CONFLICT (unique_col) DO NOTHING;                                                                                         | If an constraint is not maintained in a new insert query, you can skip it.                                                                                                                                                           |
| Handle exceptions                      | INSERT into tablename (col_name) VALUES ('values') ON CONFLICT (unique_col) DO UPDATE SET col_name=EXCLUDED.col_name;                                                           | You can handle the exception and take proper actions to resolve the issue.Here the `EXCLUDED` refers to the new entry's values.                                                                                                      |
| Add foreign key                        | CREATE TABLE person (,id BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,,first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,,last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,,car_id BIGINT REFERENCES car (id),,UNIQUE (car_id) ); | Add a foreign key column using `REFERENCE` keyword                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Commit message:

[added] section on join will update details later

README.md, after:

# bcloud-research

## Installation
Check out my [postgres installation overview](https://github.com/phase7/bcloud-research/blob/phase7-install-postgres/install-postgres-manjaro.md) to see how I installed on Manjaro.

Below we will look at some of the most useful commands of postgres command line tool.

## Postgres Shell
We can get into the shell by executing psql command. We will likely see our default user name. in this shell we can run the following commands to inspect database and execute  tasks. (will update as I go on)

| Commands  | What they do                                                |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| \q        | quit psql                                                   |
| \i FILE   | execute commands from file                                  |
| \d        | list tables, views, and sequences                           |
| \d TABLENAME| Show table schema and other details of `TABLENAME` table                                  |
| \l        | list databases                                              |
| \c DBNAME | connect to new database DBNAME (currently default username) |
| \x        | Expand view; To see long table records in a beautiful manner|

## Basic SQL (common operations and keywords)

Following are some basic sql commands for beginners. (will update as I go on)

| Operation                                    | Query                                                                                                                                                                                                                | What you should know about them                                                                                             |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CREATE DATABASE                              | CREATE DATABASE dbname;                                                                                                                                                                                              | create a database named DBNAME                                                                                              |
| DELETE DATABASE                              | CREATE DATABASE dbname;                                                                                                                                                                                              | Delete a database named DBNAME                                                                                              |
| Create a table                               | CREATE TABLE person (   id BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,   first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,   last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,   gender VARCHAR(8) NOT NULL,   email VARCHAR(150),   date_of_birth DATE NOT NULL ); | Create a new table schema with constarints                                                                                  |
| Delete a table                               | DROP TABLE tablename                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Delete a table. In db this is colloquilly called dropping a table.                                                          |
| Insert new value in table                    | INSERT INTO tablename (   col_name ) VALUES ('value');                                                                                                                                                               | insert `value` in the `col_name` column of `tablename` table                                                                |
| Insert multiple values                       | INSERT INTO person (   first_name,   last_name,   gender,   date_of_birth ) VALUES ('hey', 'bro', 'male', DATE '1234-5-6');                                                                                          | insert multiple values at multiple columns at once.                                                                         |
| Show all rows of a table                     | SELECT * FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                                             | all data from a table - `tablename`                                                                                         |
| Show specific rows                           | SELECT col1, col2 FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                                    | chosen column data from a table - `tablename`                                                                               |
| Sort data and show them                      | SELECT * FROM tablename ORDER BY col_name [ASC/DESC]                                                                                                                                                                 | show data in a sorted manner, either ASCending, or DESCending order                                                         |
| Get distinct data                            | SELECT DISTINCT col_name FROM tablename;                                                                                                                                                                             | Show unique data, rejecting the duplicate ones                                                                              |
| Filter data based on condition               | SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col='value';                                                                                                                                                                           | Show filtered data when conditions such as specific value for a column is matched!                                          |
| Filter data based on more than one condition | SELECT  *  FROM  tablename  WHERE  col1< 'value1'   AND  (col2>= 'value2'   OR  col3<> 'value3' );                                                                                                                   | Multiple conditions can be made with `AND` and `OR` operators. (`<>` is the `!=` for SQL)                                   |
| Skip rows and get specific number of rows    | SELECT * FROM tablename OFFSET 5 LIMIT 5;                                                                                                                                                                            | To get row from 6 to 10. (While `OFFSET` is ANSI Standard, `LIMIT` is limited (_pun intended_) to `postgresql` and `mysql`) |
| Same as above, but universal                 | SELECT * FROM tablename OFFSET 5 FETCH FIRST 5 ROW ONLY;                                                                                                                                                             | To get row from 6 to 10 following ANSI all the way. `FETCH` is present in all DB Engines.                                   |
| Set data range                       | SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col_name BETWEEN 'value1' AND 'value2';                        | get data output between given ranges                                                                     |
| Check condition for particular cases | SELECT   *   FROM  tablename  WHERE  col_name  IN  ( ' value1 ' , ' value2 ' ,  ' value3 '); | check for selected conditions. this method can be helpful to get multiple  or conditions checked easily. |

## Intermediate SQL (Operators and operations)

| Operation                              | Query                                                                                                                                                                           | What you should know about them                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Condition matching using patterns      |  - SELECT * FROM tablename WHERE col_name LIKE 'pattern'; - SELECT * FROM person WHERE email LIKE '%gmail%';                                                                    | select only conditions that matches pattern. For example, the second query will select all emails that have gmail in them. For details in pattern matching [click here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.3/functions-matching.html) |
| Delete a specific row                  | DELETE FROM tablename WHERE col_name='value';                                                                                                                                   | delete the condition matching row                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Update a value on a specific condition | UPDATE tablename SET col_name='new_value' WHERE id='something';                                                                                                                 | you can use all conditions allowed for SELECT operation to update a value                                                                                                                                                            |
| Add primary key                        | ALTER TABLE tablename ADD PRIMARY KEY (col_name);                                                                                                                               | Add a column as the primary key.[Details here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-constraints.html#DDL-CONSTRAINTS-PRIMARY-KEYS)                                                                                            |
| Create a constraint                    | ALTER   TABLE  person ADD  CONSTRAINT unique_email UNIQUE(email)                                                                                                                | Add a constraint for a column, here the value must be `UNIQUE`                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Create a condition constraint          | ALTER TABLE person ADD CONSTRAINT gender_constraint CHECK(gender = 'Male' OR gender = 'Female');                                                                                | Add a constraint for selective conditions to be met.                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Remove a constraint                    | ALTER TABLE person DROP CONSTRAINT constraint_name                                                                                                                              | Remove a constraint that is already set on column.[Check for details on constraints here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/ddl-constraints.html)                                                                                  |
| Ignore exceptions                      | INSERT into tablename (col_name) VALUES ('values') ON CONFLICT (unique_col) DO NOTHING;                                                                                         | If an constraint is not maintained in a new insert query, you can skip it.                                                                                                                                                           |
| Handle exceptions                      | INSERT into tablename (col_name) VALUES ('values') ON CONFLICT (unique_col) DO UPDATE SET col_name=EXCLUDED.col_name;                                                           | You can handle the exception and take proper actions to resolve the issue.Here the `EXCLUDED` refers to the new entry's values.                                                                                                      |
| Add foreign key                        | CREATE TABLE person (id BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,car_id BIGINT REFERENCES car (id),UNIQUE (car_id) ); | Add a foreign key column using `REFERENCE` keyword                                                                                                                                                                                   |

## Join operations
| Operation                                            | Query                                                  | What you should know about them                                                              |
|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Inner join, get the common result                    | SELECT * FROM person JOIN car ON person.car_id=car.id; | merge two tables based on the condition and get only the common result(s)                    |
| Left join, get the common plus all of the left table | SELECT * FROM person LEFT JOIN car using(car_uid)      | In this join you'll get all inner join results with the complete left table you have joined. |
